# Crane Trachea

## Cryptic sexual size dimorphism

Cryptic size dimorphism (CSDI) is a bit of a strange term. How can size
dimorphism be cryptic. If we can say sizes are different doesn’t that
imply we (humans) can detect the difference. After all cryptic as a
concept in biology largely relies on the human frame of reference. We
cannot tell what differences other animals can detect. No they do not
all look/smell/sound/chemically signal the same.

From a human standpoint, as if I could speak to any other, CSDI often
refers to allometric scaling differences between the sexes, where one
sexes body part is larger than expected given body size.

Here we extend a line of inquiry originating with Fitch (1999), and
extended to examine evolutionary trade offs in M. Jones and Witt (2014).
They found that some birds, crane species in particular, exhibit a
looping of the trachae (tracheal elongation). It is hypothesized that
the proportionally longer trachea act to signal larger body size through
acoustic modulation of formant spacing Fitch (1999), M. R. Jones and
Witt (2012). This can compensate for constraints on body size by like
long migratory paths M. Jones and Witt (2014). Here we grow the dataset
from M. Jones and Witt (2014) to ask if the intraspecific <u>cryptic
size dimorphism<u> they found in Sandhill Cranes is present as another
layer divergence between subspecies. Here we look for, quantify, and
evaluate mechanisms of cryptic <u>sexual<u> size dimorphism between
subspecies.

# References

Fitch, W Tecumseh. 1999. “Acoustic Exaggeration of Size in Birds via
Tracheal Elongation: Comparative and Theoretical Analyses.” *Journal of
Zoology* 248 (1): 31–48.

Jones, Matthew R, and Christopher C Witt. 2012. “Utility of Vocal
Formant Spacing for Monitoring Sandhill Crane Subspecies.” *Wildlife
Society Bulletin* 36 (1): 47–53.

Jones, MR, and CC Witt. 2014. “Migrate Small, Sound Big: Functional
Constraints on Body Size Promote Tracheal Elongation in Cranes.”
*Journal of Evolutionary Biology* 27 (6): 1256–64.
